You mentioned in the Man Ray book and in this book that a compelling reason to do these biographies is that you had read the memoirs of both these people, and they are notable not only for what they say, but for what they don't say.
Good question.
And, you know, maybe you could talk a little bit about that.
Well, especially in the case of Thomas Edison, what I did was, when I first decided...
I read every every existing biography of Thomas Edison starting in the 1870s and 80s when the first when the first biographies of him were published when he was still a young man and I came away thinking the mythic dimension of this person has been covered has been done to death the apocryphal stories and
the sort of received information that we all have in our unconscious mind about the Horatio Algerman story of the young man growing up and overcoming his disability and becoming a great American hero.
And I decided that that was going to be the foundation for the book.
I was going to build on the myth.
I was not going to devote the myth.
I was not going to deconstruct the myth.
I was not going to intellectualize the myth.
I was going to use the myth as a foundation to build upon and show that when you measure that against the actual fact of his life, he becomes an even more admirable figure.
The myth doesn't do justice to him.
The reality does justice to him.
I came away confirming my belief that he is a genius, and I don't use that term loosely.
The actuality of his life, the actual accomplishment, and the number of things he
that he thought of that never even got to become invention, staggering.
He had over a thousand patents, but he had over another thousand ideas that never became patents.
Immediately reflected in the journal, I guess, that you're hopeful of... I guess I can't say for this, but my agency has talked to five or six major magazines about
I didn't know that, by the way.
Yeah, no, a lot of things people didn't know.
I think that's what I mean.
There's so much that people think they know, and there's so much that they...
don't know.
For instance, this whole rubber thing is fascinating.
But that didn't stand out, right?
But the point is that he even thought to do it, A. And B, did you know that he assembled, which is still to date, the most definitive herbarium of rubber-bearing plants in the world?
The herbarium is a collection of scientifically
scientifically assembled and collected and archivally preserved specimens of plants by genus and species.
So I've seen Henry Hutchinson's cat produce plants.
Oh.
Have you ever been to the Hutchinson Library in California?
No.
You know, my wife loves gardens.
You mentioned your wife loves gardens.
I mean, I go out there and go to the library.
It's a little extraordinary.
And he has the largest collection of cacti, I guess, in one day, 2,500 cacti.
So apparently Edison did the same thing with the... He went around the country.
He also had sort of specimen collectors that he hired to go out to the countryside, and especially by the railroad tracks where the goldenrod-type weeds grow in perfusion and collect clippings from all over the...
all over the world.
We have clippings from Russia, Eastern Europe, China, and they're all arranged on this archival paper.
They're in these hermetically humidity-controlled cabinets, custom-made oak cabinets.
And the guy was obsessed.
When I come to transcribe it, that last factor is going to be right there on the table.
This is a very strong... No, this is good, but it's really... But there are certain things like that that people pick up.
But this is fine.
That's why it's supposed to be... The medical... I just mean the point is that once he got his idea on something that he wanted to define, encompass...
The concrete house, the ore milling, the whole industrial side of him that most people don't know of, the fact that he spent a decade of his life searching for a process to refine iron ore and to create briquettes for industrial consumption.
He built an entire iron mine up in northwestern Jersey.
And he lived up there.
He commuted home on the weekends, but he lived up there in this little shack basically for 10 years at the end of the century.
Then he went from that right into the concrete business, designed a concrete house that was like the first prefabricated house in America, poured in a mold from the top.
The entire house was made from one mold.
was poured in from the top to a funnel opening, liquid cemented, hardened, took the mold off.
Do you have any sense of, I mean, do you?
No, Jenny suggested the closing idea.
What did you do?
I laughed.
I said to her, the very thing I discussed in the scene to you, I said,
Thomas Edison, I laughed, I said, hasn't there been enough on Thomas Edison?
She said, check in books and friends, and let's see that the last biography was 15 years ago.
It was called A Streak of Luck.
I think I have it.
The problem I have with A Streak of Luck is basically the premise.
of the title is erroneous there is no luck well he says right now he quotes 90 i don't believe in luck you know inspiration but he's basically hard work the problem with the streak of luck is and it has it's not a bad book but it's overly thin it's overly weighted toward the beginning of his life it's yeah it sort of spins out
and he seems to almost lose interest in the last 25 years of Thomas Edison.
The predecessor, Matthew Josephson's book, Edison, 1959, more interesting, more entertainingly written, of course, Matthew Josephson is a journalist.
He was part of the Paris generation.
He lived in the 22,000 Paris.
He was friends with Williams and all those people, and he had more of a stylistic flair
But it's too worshipful.
It's ours too far in the other direction.
It's too sycophantic and worshipful.
I wanted to construct something from the ground up, and I went back to his antecedents.
I wanted to find out more about his ancestry and his Canadian side, his Dutch side, what really happened during his childhood.
And of course, the main breakthrough for me was this huge archive of correspondence that his wife had.
14,000 letters that never came by anybody.
I was very fortunate, but I'm the first biographer, too.
ingratiate myself, not ingratiate, but to obtain the trust and the cooperation of both sides of the family.
The Edison side, the Miller family, his wife's side, Mina Miller, his niece, was very helpful to me.
Thank you.
So I spent an entire summer looking at 14,000 frames of microphones of correspondence from all of his children.
Oh, it is all a microphone.
And that gave me the human side that had been totally lacking, you know, the story of the man behind the invention, not about the... And where did you do all this?
Well...
The microfilms have been in a safe deposit world for four decades.
They're owned by the Charles Edison Fund, which is a foundation that was established by Thomas Edison's older son by his second marriage.
So, technically, they didn't have to let you see them then, did they?
No, they did not.
They're not in the public report.
No, they are not.
But through the trustees, the trustees, Nancy R-N-A-R-N-N, Springline Miller's niece, she introduced me to the people there, and they...
Read my other works, and I told them I wouldn't use any restricted, some restricted material, which I said, which they didn't show me, and I said, fine.
You know, very small, relatively small amount of restricted material.
And they gave me the microfilms, and I borrowed them for a few months, and I went to the public library, since I don't have access to it.
I went to the Clifton Public Library, and I read all the microfilms at night, and the library is open until 9 o'clock at night, and that's what I did.
That's really great that you're able to do that here.
You don't have to go spend two or three weeks at a time.
That's the edition that you sent me.
No, it's to Capo, the paperback.
So that's the one you sent me.
The Man Ray book.
That's the paperback.
Oh, is that what I... That's fine.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But that's the one that's in print, yeah.
And is the Williams book in print?
No.
No, okay.
I thought we put all the title issues.
No, no, only the books that are written.
James and Prince.
It just went out of print.
It was in print for about nine years.
Did that have a paperback?
No.
How did that do, by the way?
Do we talk sales?
Not for this audience.
Okay.
Can you tell me what the first printing is in the Edison book?
You know, I think it's been upgraded.
I think you should ask Hyperion.
Okay.
Because...
in the last couple of weeks of the Publisher's Weekly Review, and then the Barnes and Noble thing.
Did I tell you about that?
Oh, you did.
Yeah, you showed it to me.
This is the Barnes and Noble feature front page.
That's great.
They must have to up the first printing.
I would ask Jennifer.
Any big surprises for you?
I mean, did the guy...
Did the guy come alive for you?
Did you feel that you got a handle on this solution?
I know you mentioned in the Man Ray book that there was a chain of enigmas.
A chain of enigmas was the phrase you used for Man Ray.
I'm not so sure that there are as many enigmas here.
It might, but there still must have been surprises.
Yeah.
But anyway, you can answer that any way you want.
I'll respond to it.
Thank you.
Surprises?
Never mind surprises.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, what...
What are the things you learned about the guy?
Did he live for you?
Yes, because there are two things that struck me.
The first was the sheer magnitude of what he did with his time.
The sheer amount of work, the productivity of the man.
As I say, for every invention that saw the light of day, there was one that didn't.
was developed and cultivated that he thought of and his ability to harness the energies of other people all the incredibly intelligent people that i talk about in the book the cast of characters most of whom no one's ever heard of who labored and worked for him and gave him their their psyches and their energies over the course of three or four or five decades and were totally loyal to him
that he had the ability to marshal the devotion of these people and to have their energy feed into his success.
He was a very charismatic leader and a very adept leader.
But on the flip side, his family relationships were very unsuccessful.
Even his great-grandchildren,
The distant descendants of him that I've met, they seem to suffer from being in the shadow, the giant shadow of Thomas Edison.
It's gotta be hard.
Well, his son Charles wrote a book, a memoir of Charles Edison.
It's called Out of the Shadow.
But he never really came out of the shadow entirely.
To have someone with a household name be your father or your stepfather, that is the theme that you get from these six children corresponding that I mentioned earlier.
You know, will he like this?
Will he appreciate this?
Am I good enough for him?
You know, I've always measured myself against him.
I'll never be as good as he was.
I'll never be as smart as he was.
I'll never be as successful as he was.
And I think this sort of...
pervasive hang-up that all his children had.
He did nothing to discourage that.
Nothing.
He really kept them at arm's length.
And part of that was just he didn't have the time to treat that first wife so unkindly?
Well, he was obsessed with his own rise to fame.
By the time he married the second woman,
He was a millionaire, and he had already leveled off, and she had much more of a self-image, much better self-image than her first wife.
She was a fully formed person, and she had her own life, and she really, even though she worshipped him and lived for him, she also had her own identity, and she had causes, and she belonged to a lot of different boards.
community beautification and the Chautauqua institution, of course, and the church and the YMCA and the women's clubs with the oranges and all these other things, that she had a life.
She had a life.
But she suffered from neglect and loneliness.
I go into that in the book.
There's a little bit of correspondence from him that she saves.
You know, he tries to get her to come up and stay with him up in the mine.
She doesn't want to.
And he resented that.
I found it amusing just how apathetic he was to the artifacts.
Like you mentioned how Henry before, he was just letting Menlo park go to... Who cares?
I mean, this is past.
I think I had no sense of... I mean, like, I would be grabbing all these little things.
No, the most important thing to him was up here in his noodle, you know, in his noggin.
That was his most precious resource.
And then those notebooks, this is the thing, he saved every one of those notebooks.
They are an unbroken chronicle.
So that's a good quote.
Why don't you just continue with that?
He had 3,500 notebooks, starting in 1870s and all the way to the 1930s.
He must have had some inherent idea of the value of this, what he was doing, because those are
a seamless narrative of everything he worked on from A to Z. Do you think he kept them with the expectation that others would be reading them?
No, he kept them as a record because when you're involved in patent development, you have to have a meticulous record of the chronology of everything you do.
Everything is dated.
Everything has the time of day on it.
or 3 o'clock in the morning or 4 o'clock in the morning or whatever.
I mean, that's how you can tell what kind of work schedule we had.
It's 5.30 a.m.
We're closing our labors for today.
You know, 7.30 a.m.
Took a nap.
Now I'm going to start doing this again.
I am the first person to think of this.
I am the first person to think of that.
I decided that we should put this wire next to that wire.
All this is necessary when you're creating products
to counter the other people who come along and say, well, I thought of that, too.
And you say, well, I, you know, and they have witnesses, two witnesses to each thing.
You know, I'm going through the same thing in a very small way with my little literary feature syndicate.
I haven't got a trademark for that.
If I were you, I'd do that right away.
Because it's a terrific name.
Yes, it is.
I mean,
But I can demonstrate how long I've been using it.
I've got checks that come to me that are made out to the syndic, you know what I'm saying?
But it's the same thing that you're saying.
You can demonstrate how long you've had it.
I mean, you've got a claim to it, don't you?
Well, he was very into the proprietorship of ideas.
Ideas were his most precious commodity, and he was an endless fount of ideas.
And then other people enacted them.
But he was the one that sat there
you know, just disgorging these ideas.
And, you know, you point out, in a number of different things, he wasn't really the first one with the idea.
No.
He was the one that... But he was the one that made it practical.
He made it practical, and he had the best people who could, you know, put the thing together.
He had draftsmen.
He had excellent mechanics.
He had excellent fabricators of his models, you know.
He had excellent chemists.
He had excellent electricians.
He had the top people in every field.
And they worked for him.
He gave him a piece of the action financially.
You mentioned that his health was paid beautifully.
But in exchange for that, you've never heard of Francis Upton.
You've never heard of Charles Batchelor.
You've never heard of Samuel Insull.
These are people you've never heard of because they basically sold their soul to him.
You point out how Bachelor always made very clear, even when writing home, this is Mr. Edison.
This is Edison.
This is his game.
I get rid of the glory for Nelson.
And, you know, it's almost like Bill Gates today, in a way, is that I was thinking.
It's funny you mention Bill Gates, because in the New Yorker profile on Bill Gates last year, they use the analogy.
Do they?
Uh-uh.
The Edisonian analogy.
It's there.
I think of him.
In fact, that's the last event.
Oh, I'd love it if you could mention that.
Yeah, well.
Because at this point, I'm very excited about it because a year ago, I mean, a lot of things have happened in the past couple of months, build up and...
Um, they're sending me, uh, well, at this moment, as of this discussion, all we have now is a week in Florida to start with, Epcot, for two days.
You going to Gainesville?
I'm going to Epcot, Fort Myers in Miami at the moment.
But Jennifer... You don't have to go there, because I write for them.
They will get... No, I'm not going there.
But Jennifer might have more information about where else she's been.
But it might help me get some Florida papers.
Oh, once I find out, I'll tell you.
I will tell you as soon as I find out.
But they're having a little party, which I'll invite you to.
Patricia Bosworth, who's an author, she wrote the Diane Arbus biography.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, I interviewed her.
She's a good friend of mine.
She's having a party for me.
I like that book.
And then on March 14th, I'm giving a big slide show at the National Arts Club.
I'm going to do a Thomas Edison slide show.
I'm going to have a hundred slides.
I'm going to get all my pictures.
Many of them are not even in the book, like the one I show you.
I'm going to get slides made up and do this very...
interesting chronological glide show and talk about kind of that and sell the book.
Where is it going to be?
National Arts Club, March 14th.
That's in New York, is it?
Yeah, Gramercy Park, which is where he lives.
He lives right next door.
It's where the Players Club lives.
Right next to Players Club.
But in the next couple of weeks, they'll start to put my tour together, and so I'll be able to know.
Let me know.
Yeah, I will.
It might help me tie it in.
You know, again, I... You've written poetry?
Have you published poetry?
Oh, yeah, we didn't get into it.
I've published several books of poetry with a small press called the Salt Works Press.
Where are they at?
They're now in Colorado, but they were in Martha's Vineyard.
They were at the beginning.
Where?
And then I published a book, The Poetry Writing Handbook, that was published by Scholastic, and that was a textbook.
You mentioned that one.
And that did very well.
It was offered by the Teacher's Book Club.
Great.
What were the titles of the poetry collections?
One was called, well, the major one was called On the Trail of Messages.
What year?
78, okay.
And then the Poetry Writing Handbook and the G.K.
Hall, the thank you, the William Coles Williams catalog.
And then I did a study guide to a separate piece published by Barron's study guide, like a
A higher level cliff note, I think.
It's still in print.
I still get royalties from that.
I thought I did a very good job on that.
And then the three biographies, and now I'm doing the Mexican book.
Do you still write poetry?
No, I don't.
I stopped writing poetry when my kids were born.
I feel that definitely the poetry that I was writing was supplanted by...
the reality of having kids.
I feel that the kids were the poetry.
I definitely feel that the poetry ended when the kids came, and I know why that is.
I'm convinced of that.
Good stuff.
Good.
Triple header.
Bookers and Months Club, Quality Paperback Book Club, History Book Club, they all are offering it.
It's not a main selection, so I can't.
It's a featured selection.
Alternate selection of featured selection.
UPB.
Now, when does history... It's about a year after, right?
Yeah, but History Book Club and Book of the Month, I know because they're offering it with the Mozart.
They're offering it in the same order with the Mozart.
Congratulations.
So there's that.
There's the Barnes & Noble.
I just think there's been some good hard interest.
It's good.